## Why fusion?

According to the IEA, 85% of global energy consumption comes from fossil fuels. Renewables are growing but are barely denting the growth rate of energy consumption from oil and natural gas. The world needs to drastically reduce carbon emissions, and fusion power is one of the few energy sources capable of replacing energy from fossil fuels over the long term. The major inputs to fusion reactions are isotopes of hydrogen and lithium, which are either abundant or can be produced onsite. The main by-product of fusion is helium, which is safe. Fusion energy is not a fringe idea: Most industrialized nations have large fusion research programs, and there are a growing number of privately funded fusion startups. Fusion downsides: There is some radioactive waste created in the metals used to confine the reactor, but this waste has a half-life in the 10's of years, rather than 10,000's of years for fission waste. Fusion technology is already proven, but not yet economically viable. Fusion experiments are vastly complex and can take decades to build and validate. At current funding levels, and without further major breakthroughs, it will likely be at least 30 years until commercial reactors are available. Even if you aren't interested in the future of humanity, fusion research is a deeply fascinating world of science and engineering problems that is worth exploring for the sheer nerd value. 

## How does Fusion work?

Fusion is a reaction that combines two or more nuclei to form a new nucleus. This is the opposite reaction from fission, which powers traditional nuclear energy plants. Fission involves breaking large nuclei into smaller parts. In both cases, the outputs of the reaction have less mass than the inputs, and the difference is released as energy. From Einstein's equation we know that a small mass translates into a large amount of energy. A basic fusion reaction powers our sun and other stars, where hydrogen nuclei fuse to form helium, generating heat and light. This reaction requires the high pressure of a star's gravity to induce, but there are other fusion reactions we can reproduce more easily on earth. To trigger fusion, the fuel needs to be heated to millions of degrees. This converts the fuel into a 4th state of matter called plasma. Once fusion starts, the reaction itself produces heat, so that vastly less or theoretically no external heating is required to sustain it once the plasma is burning.

The easiest fusion reaction to produce on earth combines hydrogen-2 (deuterium) and hydrogen-3 (tritium), producing helium, a free neutron, and a lot of heat. This reaction is known by the shorthand DT. In a secondary reaction, the free neutron is combined with lithium-7, to produce tritium and more helium. Other reactions are possible and there is active research into the best approach, but DT is the most viable option today. Since this reaction sequence produces its own tritium, and deuterium is abundant in water, the limiting fuel source is lithium. Fusion creates more energy per mass of fuel than any other source, a million times more efficient than fossil fuels. This means a small amount of fuel goes a long way. Current lithium supplies are sufficient for 100,000 years or more. Fusion reactions have also been created with deuterium alone, and although less efficient, with this method we have enough fuel on earth to last until beyond the death of our sun.

## What are the major categories of fusion reactors?

The central problem for a fusion reactor is how to confine the plasma, which is hotter than our sun and therefore no material can hold it (iron boils at 3K degrees for example). There are two major methods: inertial confinement fusion (ICF), and magnetic confinement fusion (MCF). ICF is not looking promising as an energy source, so I'll focus on MCF here. In MCF, the plasma is confined using a magnetic field. This is made efficient through the magic of superconductors, which can sustain a magnetic field with low power draw. The most popular design so far is the tokamak, first developed by soviet scientists in the 1950's. The world's  largest working fusion reactor is based on this design: Joint European Torus (JET). Another much larger tokamak, called ITER, is currently under construction. ITER is expected to be the first "net-positive" reactor that produces more energy than it consumes. Tokamaks have a major obstacle to continuous operation, that the plasma does not remain stable over time. The workaround is to run a DC current around the circumference of the plasma (poloidal current) to hold it in place. However this cannot be run continuously. The second most promising MCF design is called a stellarator (also the second coolest reactor name, after the perhapsatron). In a stellarator, computer modelling creates a complex plasma shape that is inherently stable, removing the need for a plasma current. There are major stellarator experiments ongoing, most notably the W7-X reactor in Germany. There are many other experimental directions being explored, including several variations on the tokamak: spherical tokamaks with almost no "hole" in the donut, and Magnetized Target Fusion (MTF) that produces plasma in a tokamak and then compresses it to increase the fusion reaction rate. All designs other than tokamaks and stellerators have significant obstacles and are unproven options today. This could change with further engineering breakthroughs.

## How close are we to reaching practical use for energy production?

To measure progress you need clear metrics. There are three major metrics used by the fusion community: gain factor, fusion triple product, and plasma duration. Gain factor (using the symbol Q) simply represents the energy output from fusion, divided by input energy required to create the plasma. A value of Q=1 means the reactor produces exactly the same energy that it uses. Due to the energy loss converting the reactor heat energy back into electricity (via steam turbine), Q needs to be at least 2-3 before it is truly energy-positive. Gain grows exponentially due to increasing heat produced by the reaction, so beyond Q=10 it is not a big leap to reach Q=∞. The highest result from any fusion reactor so far is Q=0.67 from JET. ITER was originally designed for Q=∞, but was scaled back to target Q=10 due to funding cuts. Fusion triple product measures efficiency of the plasma in producing fusion reactions. The triple product is calculated by multiplying temperature, density, and confinement time (rate of energy loss). The JT-60 tokamak in Japan holds the record for highest triple product (1.53×10^21 keV·s·m^-3). ITER will likely exceed this because increasing reactor size results in higher confinement time. As a torus grows, volume for fusion grows faster than surface area for cooling. Plasma duration measures how long the reactor can operate continuously. The W7-X stellerator has the current best expected plasma duration at 30 minutes. ITER is expected to have a plasma duration of 10 minutes. To summarize the current state, there are reactor designs that are projected to produce net energy, but only for short durations. A working power plant needs to have a plasma duration in days or weeks rather than minutes, so there is still a long way to go. Future progress is hard to measure. As mentioned before, without major new breakthroughs the best estimate I've seen is 2050 for a commercial fusion plant (EUROfusion roadmap). However as we say in tech, this is an industry that is ripe for disruption. There are many different fields where innovation could result in major reactor improvements (plasma physics, materials, fuel sources, superconductors, computer simulation, etc). One or more major advances in these fields could chop years or even decades off the roadmap. Some private fusion ventures have stated they can produce commercial reactors by 2030, but these claims lack concrete evidence or peer review.

## Is fusion safe?

Nuclear energy has a poor reputation for safety, which has resulted in defunding since the Fukushima failure. However despite high profile disasters (and HBO series), traditional fission power plants are very safe. If you lookup deaths per terrawatt-hour by energy source, you will see it is far safer than most conventional power sources, including hydro (compare Chernobyl to Banqiao Dam disaster, for example). The three major fission failures have a simple reason. Fission reactions are hard to stop while fuel remains available, which means removal of negative feedback or lost cooling can result in a runaway reaction. Fusion does not have this risk. The worst case failure state of a fusion reaction would involve an ignited plasma, which is the state where the reaction produces enough heat to sustain itself. However the reaction can only continue while the plasma remains confined. A plasma that breaks confinement will rapidly cool and stop reacting. This would severely damage the reactor containment vessel, and result in surrounding metals becoming mildly radioactive. The result would be expensive to repair but have very low risk to human life. Another important safety topic is nuclear proliferation, which I will cover in another thread tomorrow.

## Fusion and Nuclear Proliferation

Nuclear weapons are capable of ending human civilization. When looking at long term energy sources, it should be compatible with a world free of nuclear weapons. This is a major drawback of fission power, which requires similar fuels to those used by nuclear weapons. The infrastructure required to support fission power (uranium processing and enrichment) can easily be repurposed to produce nuclear weapons. Weapon-grade plutonium is produced in nuclear fission reactors. Replacing traditional energy sources with fission reactors would put this infrastructure in more countries and forever come with the risk of nuclear weapon proliferation. Now let's look at fusion. Some nuclear weapons use fusion reactions to magnify their power, but still require a fission reaction to trigger fusion. The fuels used in a fusion reactor are not sufficient to produce nuclear weapons. Fusion reactors do produce a large supply of free neutrons, which could be used to enrich uranium for use in nuclear weapons. However, uranium is easy to detect, and since there is no valid reason for such materials in a fusion plant it would be easy to monitor for illegal enrichment activity. A long term future that uses a mixture of fusion and renewable power sources would allow for complete elimination of the tech and infrastructure needed to create nuclear weapons.

## Conclusion and References

Fusion energy is full of both promise and frustration. The long term potential is so large it is worth pursuing, but it won't help in the short term. It is more urgent to pursue energy storage, renewables, and fission power to lower carbon now. At the same time it restores faith in humanity to see so many brilliant people pursuing a goal that is likely essential for humanity in long term. At the height of the cold war Soviet scientists and US military were sharing knowledge on fusion, and modern projects like ITER are a huge success story in int'l cooperation. It is a field worth following, and I'm excited to see where it goes. I have no expertise here so please study it yourself and come to your own conclusions.

Resources: if you only have a few hours to learn about fusion energy, I highly recommend @omegataupodcast episodes in the following order: 304, 22, 157, 312, 285.

Most useful book: The Future of Fusion Energy by Jason Parisi and @JB_Fusion. Detailed argument on why fusion is worth pursuing, approachable physics explanation, historical survey, and some advanced topics.

Advanced book: Nuclear Fusion by Edward Morse. If you really want to get into detail on the math and physics, but good high level summaries too.

Wikipedia has a lot of pages on Fusion. It is useful to lookup specific details, but not a good main source because fringe ideas are lumped together with mainstream ideas and it is hard to form useful conclusions.


Eurofusion roadmap, source of the "30 years" estimate. https://www.euro-fusion.org/fileadmin/user_upload/EUROfusion/Documents/Roadmap.pdf

